>> Frontline is made possible
by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Thank you.
With major funding from
the John D. and Catherine
T. MacArthur Foundation.
Helping to build a more just
world.
And additional funding from the
Park Foundation.
Committed to raising public
awareness.
With additional funding for
this program from:
( sirens blaring )
>> Tonight
on Frontline, American health
care is in big trouble.
It's the world's most expensive
medical system, yet it leaves
47 million people without
coverage, and drives hundreds
of thousands into bankruptcy
each year.
>> I believe the problem is not
that folks are trying to avoid
getting health care, the problem
is they can't afford it.
>> We are approaching a perfect
storm of problems that, if not
addressed by the next president,
will cause our health care
system to implode.
>> I am not running for
president to put band-aids on
our problems.
I want to get to universal
health care for every single
American.
>> In the middle of our national
debate, Washington
Post reporter T.R. Reid
journeys to five countries.
>> REID: Have you ever paid a
medical bill?
>> No, never.
>> ...and finds out how other
rich free-market democracies
provide health care for all.
>> REID: How many people in
Switzerland go bankrupt because
of medical bills?
>> Nobody.
Doesn't happen.
It would be a huge scandal if it
happens.
>> Tonight on Frontline, what
it's like to be Sick Around
the World.
>> REID: That's the capitol of
the richest, most powerful
nation in history.
But when it comes to providing
health care for people, that
great country, our country, is a
fourth-rate power.
The World Health Organization
says the US health care system
rates 37th in the world in terms
of quality and fairness.
All the other rich countries do
better than we do, and yet they
spend a heck of a lot less.
How do they do it?
That's what this film is about.
We're going to go around the
world to see what lessons we can
learn to fix America's sick,
sick health care system.
I've covered the world as a
foreign correspondent, and right
now I'm writing a book about
health care systems overseas.
First stop on my tour is Great
Britain, where our family lived
for five years.
Even though the UK is our
closest European ally, its
health care solution that is,
the government-run National
Health Service-- may seem too
close to socialism for most
Americans.
Still, we can learn something
here.
For about half of what we pay
per person, the NHS covers
everybody and has somewhat
better health statistics, longer
life expectancy, lower infant
mortality.
Britain's National Health
Service is dedicated to the
proposition that you should
never have to pay a medical
bill.
In the NHS, there's no insurance
premium, no co-pay, no fee at
all.
The system covers everybody.
And, you know, when we lived
here, my family got really good
care from the NHS, although we
often had to wait to see a
doctor.
And yet the newspapers here are
full of NHS horror stories--
rationing, waiting lists,
terrible mistakes.
So I've come to London to see
this NHS.
Is it an answer for the U.S., or
just some horrible socialist
nanny state?
The Brits pay for health care
out of tax revenue, so the
government owns the hospitals,
like this one, the Whittington
Hospital in North London.
The doctors who work here are
salaried government employees.
Does that sound like socialized
medicine?
Well, according to the hospital
CEO, David Sloman, the Brits
like it that way.
>> I think people are proud of
it.
90% of people who use the NHS
think it's good or excellent.
So people think very, very
highly of it.
People who don't use it, don't
think so well of it, actually.
>> REID: Would you say most
British people go their whole
lives and never get a medical
bill?
>> Every single person who's
born in the UK will use the NHS
at one point in their lives.
The majority of people will use
it as the only provider of their
medical care.
And none of them will be
presented a bill at any point
during that time.
>> REID: No medical bills.
Sounds sweet to me.
And here's something else that's
different: there's no medical
bankruptcy.
This is Jeremy Cadle.
His son, Tom, is being treated
for leukemia at the Whittington.
At least he doesn't have to
worry about going broke.
>> He's had eight weeks in
hospital.
Apart from the times when he
needs chemotherapy, we've got
community health care that comes
in on a weekly basis to take his
blood.
Hasn't cost us a penny.
You know, it's astonishing the
care you can get.
>> On your picture?
>> REID: Of course, it's not
free.
The Brits pay much higher taxes
than we do to cover health care.
But even so, does it sound a bit
too good to be true?
To find out, I sought out a
long-time NHS watcher, Nigel
Hawkes of the "Times," for a
more critical perspective.
Look, this all sounds really
sweet.
>> ( laughs )
>> Does it work?
>> It works in some respects.
I think primary care, the family
doctor service, is pretty good,
and emergency care works quite
well.
Where I think it can fall down
is on elective care-- hip
replacements, heart operations,
this kind of thing.
It used to be of the order of 18
months to get a new hip.
That's been greatly reduced by
the current government over the
last ten years.
It's down to certainly less than
six months, and for most people
about two or three.
>> There are 400,000 fewer
people on waiting lists than in
1997.
Waiting times...
>> REID: In the last decade in
Britain, Tony Blair and other
politicians have reduced the
waiting lists.
They did it by spending more
money and by bringing some
market mechanisms into a
government-run system.
Today government-owned hospitals
like the Whittington compete
against each other for
government money.
In today's NHS, patients can
choose which hospital to go to.
>> Oh, of course we compete.
You know, we do on our web site.
We'll make sure you can book
into our place at least as quick
as all the other places around
here.
But we're all competing around
what I think are now respectable
margins, whereas, previously,
you know, it was six months or
seven months.
Now, in some specialties, I
could proceed tomorrow.
>> REID: It's easy to see why
choice might suit patients, but
what do government-run hospitals
get out of it?
We don't understand why people
would compete when you can't
make more money.
In America, people compete to
make profit.
>> Yes.
That's a very fair point.
I mean, here you would compete
in order to survive.
Because if you start losing
patients to another hospital,
your services are going to be
under threat.
>> What we've seen over the past
ten years is a move away from
Bevin's ideal of an NHS for all.
We've seen the creeping
privatization of services.
>> REID: When I was in London, I
stumbled on this rally in
Trafalgar Square, and I
discovered that many NHS
staffers are angry about these
new trends that could close some
of the less-popular hospitals.
They were also protesting
government plans to privatize
some NHS services.
You're probably 50, or even more
than that.
Have you ever paid a medical
bill?
>> Isn't he very kind?
>> REID: Have you ever paid a
medical bill?
>> No, never.
>> REID: Will you ever pay a
medical bill in your life?
>> Not likely.
>> I hope not.
This is why we're doing this.
We don't want to.
And even in ten years time, if
we're not around, we don't want
our kids to do it, either.
>> REID: While the hospitals
struggle with reforms, the GPs
have embraced them.
I went to visit one who
practices in the West London
neighborhood of Shepherds Bush.
>> Patricia Wilton?
>> Yes.
>> REID: In Britain, health care
starts here.
>> Hi, have a seat.
>> REID: Nobody can to go
directly to a specialist.
First you have to go to a
gatekeeper, like Dr. Ahmed
Badat.
>> ( coughing )
>> Huh, a nasty cough.
>> REID: He's a family doctor, a
general practitioner.
GPs hold down costs for the
system and give people what the
Brits call a "medical home."
My family had one just down the
street, and we liked it.
>> You're going to have an X-ray
done here.
Open your mouth.
>> REID: GPs are paid a fixed
amount based on the number of
patients they have.
The average list is 1,800
people.
And get this: they make a bonus
for keeping their patients
healthy.
So when Dr. Badat does a good
job of caring for patients with
diabetes and heart disease, he
gets paid more.
How much more?
>> It works out about £90,000.
>> REID: So that's increasing
your salary by $180,000 a year.
That's not bad.
>> Yes, yes.
>> REID: I'm reading the
newspaper.
It says docs are doing well
here.
>> I can't complain.
>> REID: Dr. Badat has had
personal experience with U.S.
medicine.
He had a heart attack while on
vacation in Las Vegas, and was
rushed to the county hospital.
>> The treatment was absolutely
fantastic.
But I was there eight days.
The total bill came to $67,000.
I mean, that is preposterous.
>> REID: Critics say Britain has
the opposite problem: care costs
the patients too little here.
Do you have patients who come
twice a week or something?
>> Yes.
There's always like that.
>> REID: Are they sick, or...
>> No.
I think they're just lonely
people, they are... so just want
somebody to chat to.
But then there are people I
never see at all.
And they come and register, I
don't see them for three years,
five years.
>> REID: With access this easy,
the doctor and the system have a
strong incentive to keep people
healthy.
The result: Britain has become a
world leader in preventive
medicine.
Just look at all these services
GPs here aggressively promote
and talk to their patients
about.
To sum up, then, there's a lot
to like in Britain: no bills;
NHS waiting lists are getting
shorter; there's excellent
preventive medicine.
But there's probably still too
much government here for
American tastes, even if the NHS
is trying to be more market
savvy.
The next country on my tour
couldn't be more different.
Our family lived there twice.
I was the Tokyo correspondent
for the "Washington Post."
Japan has 130 million people.
And whenever I come to this
station in Tokyo, I feel like
every one of them is right here.
It's a ferociously capitalist
economy.
They have no natural resources,
but they've built the second-
richest country in the world.
And, you know, it's 130 million
healthy people.
They have better national health
than we do.
They cover everybody and-- get
this-- they spend half as much
as the United States on health
care per capita.
How do they do that?
One thing is for certain:
Japanese health care is a
bargain.
For just 8% of GDP-- that's less
than even the British spend--
the Japanese have built a system
with fabulous health statistics.
They have the longest healthy
life expectancy in the world and
the lowest infant mortality
rate.
Now, part of that's due to diet
and lifestyle, but the health
system must be doing something
right.
Everybody's covered, but unlike
the Brits, the Japanese don't
pay for all of it through taxes.
Instead, everybody has to sign
up for a health insurance
policy.
You get it at work or through a
community-based insurer.
The government picks up the tab
for those who are too poor.
This system is known as social
insurance, and it's a model
that's used in many wealthy
countries.
As for the health care itself,
that's certainly not socialist.
80% of the hospitals are
private, more than in the U.S.,
and almost every doctor's office
is a private business.
Dr. Kono Hitoshi is a typical
doctor.
He runs a private 19-bed
hospital in the Tokyo
neighborhood of Soshigoya.
The Japanese are prodigious
consumers of health care.
They go to the doctor three
times as often as Americans do,
and since there are no
gatekeepers, they can go see any
specialist they want.
Do you have to make an
appointment to come?
>> REID: Never?
>> Never.
>> REID: How long do you see the
doctor?
>> Three minutes.
>> REID: It seems like such a
short visit.
>> REID: Surveys show the
Japanese are highly satisfied
with their health system.
>> ( speaking Japanese )
>> REID: Excuse me.
She says, "This annual physical
is really a great idea.
I think that's why I've stayed
so healthy, because they really
look out for me and check out
all my problems."
>> ( speaking Japanese )
>> REID: ( translating ): Well,
it's not bad, as a matter of
fact.
You can't call it bad, because
everybody has the insurance and
the insurance pretty much takes
care of the bills."
>> ( speaking Japanese )
>> REID: "So I think the
Japanese health care system is
really good.
I know nothing about other
countries.
What do people in your country
think about your health care
system?" she says.
Here's something else that's
different: Japanese patients
have much longer hospital stays
than Americans, and they love
technology, like scans.
They have nearly twice as many
MRIs per capita as Americans;
eight times as many as the
Brits.
So how do they keep costs under
control?
Well, it turns out the Japanese
Health Ministry tightly controls
the price of health care right
down to the smallest detail.
Every two years, the physicians
and the health ministry
negotiate a fixed price for
every single procedure and drug.
Like the items in this sushi
bar, everything from open heart
surgery to a routine check-up
has a standard price, and this
price is the same everywhere in
Japan.
If a doctor tries to boost his
income by increasing the number
of procedures, well, then, guess
what?
At the next negotiation, the
government lowers the price.
That's what happened with MRIs,
which are incredibly cheap in
Japan.
I asked the country's top health
economist, Professor Naoki
Ikegami, to tell us how that
happened.
In Denver, where I live, if you
get an MRI of your neck region,
it's $1,200.
And the doctor we visited in
Japan says he gets $98 for an
MRI.
So how do you do that?
>> Well, in 2002, the government
says that the MRIs, we are
paying too much.
So in order to be within the
total budget, we will cut them
by 35%.
>> REID: So, if I'm a doctor,
why don't I say, "Well, I'm not
going to do them then, it's not
enough money"?
>> You forgot that we have only
one payment system.
So if you want to do your MRIs,
unless you can get private
paying patients, which is almost
impossible in Japan, you go out
of business.
>> REID: So that shafts the
medical device makers and must
limit innovation, right?
Well, no.
Japanese manufacturers of
scanning equipment, like
Toshiba, found ways to make
inexpensive machines they could
sell to doctors.
And guess what?
Now they're exporting these
machines all over the world.
But price regulation also hits
the doctors hard.
Dr. Kono can't charge what he
wants.
He can only charge what the
official price book dictates.
>> REID: If somebody comes in
with a cut that's less than six
square inches-- so, fairly small
cut-- he gets 450 YEN, $4.30, to
sew that up.
That's incredibly cheap.
>> REID: He then told me what it
costs to stay in his hospital.
Okay, you're going to love this.
So you know how much it costs to
spend the night in a hospital
here, according to this price
book?
If you stay in a room with four
people, ten dollars a night.
If you have a private room, $90
to spend the night in a hospital
in a private room here.
That's because the government
set the price.
>> REID: Is that fair?
>> It's fair.
>> REID: Oh, it is.
>> REID: The doctors have to
live with the price book, but
Japanese patients have to play
their part in financing the
system by paying into a social
insurance fund.
If you lose your job in Japan,
you don't lose your health
insurance.
Unlike the U.S., you switch to a
community insurer, and these
insurance companies have very
little in common with their
American counterparts.
Can they turn her down if she
has heart disease or something?
>> That is forbidden.
>> REID: These health care plans
covering basic health care for a
worker and his family, do they
make a profit?
>> No, because they... they are
not allowed to make a profit,
and anything left over is
carried over to the next year.
And if there's a lot carried
over, then the premium rate
would go down.
>> REID: Insurance companies
barred from making a profit,
national price regulation--
that's all good news for
patients.
The average premium for a
Japanese family is just $280 a
month, with the employer paying
at least half, a lot less than
most Americans pay.
It's good news for Japanese
employers as well.
J.R. Tokai, the company that
runs this bullet train to Osaka,
told me that its health costs
are about half of 1% of
operating expenses.
General Motors pays eight times
as much as that.
So here's a country with the
longest life expectancy,
excellent health results, no
waiting lists and rock bottom
costs.
What's not to like?
But the president of the Nagoya
Central Hospital, Professor
Saito Hidero, showed me the
downside.
>> I think our system is pretty
good, pretty good.
But no system is perfect.
>> REID: Yes.
>> But now 50% of hospitals are
in financial deficit now.
>> REID: No, I didn't know that.
In Japan?
>> 50% in Japan.
So I'm afraid hospitals may be
one of the endangered species in
Japan now.
>> Ah...
>> REID: 50% in financial
deficit?
That sounds unsustainable.
So here's the weakness.
While we spend too much on
medicine, the Japanese seem to
spend too little.
In a country with ten dollar per
night hospital stays, the prices
are just not high enough to
balance the books.
But the Japanese system is so
popular that they're not going
to rip it apart.
The experts say they'll have to
increase prices a little to save
the hospitals from going broke.
Back home, our problem is
patients going broke.
And in Japan, how many people go
bankrupt from medical costs?
>> I don't know.
( speaking Japanese )
We never heard of it.
Yeah, almost never hear of,
yeah.
>> REID: Before leaving Tokyo, I
went to the Meiji Jingu Shrine,
a deeply spiritual place.
I left a prayer asking for
something I think almost all of
us can agree on: a health system
where, as in Japan, everyone
gets care and nobody goes broke
paying doctor bills.
Next, to a country a bit more
like the U.S., the nation that
gave us aspirin and X-rays, the
third-richest economy in the
world.
It's Germany.
In many ways they're just like
us, except, that is, for their
health care.
That imposing figure behind me
is Otto von Bismarck, the
Prussian Chancellor in the
1880s.
And he's the guy who invented
the concept of health care
systems, the notion that a
government has to provide
mechanisms so all its people can
get medical care when they need
it.
And today, the Bismark model is
used all over the world.
Thanks to the Bismarck model,
everybody in Germany is offered
health care.
While the rich are allowed to
opt out and pay privately, about
90% of Germans choose to stay in
the national system.
And that system is famous not
only for covering all the
basics-- plus mental health,
dental and optical-- they'll
also pay for alternative
therapies like homeopathy.
They'll pay you to go to a spa.
The system's even been known to
cover belly dancing lessons.
As in Japan, the delivery of
health care is largely a market
affair carried out by private
doctors and private hospitals.
I visited Dr. Christina von
Koekritz, a family doctor
practicing in the small town of
Kladow, south of Berlin.
If I call your office and say,
"Oh, my shoulder kind of hurts,
I'm not sure what's wrong," how
long would it take me to see
you?
>> One or two weeks.
If it's serious, same day.
>> REID: Serious, same day.
If I come in here and you look
at my shoulder and say, "Well, I
think maybe an orthopedic
specialist should look at it,"
then how long would I have wait
to see the...
>> It's different.
Perhaps another week or two.
>> REID: Yeah.
>> Yes.
>> REID: What if the orthopedic
specialist said, "Well, we have
to operate on your shoulder"?
Do you know how long I would
have to wait for that?
>> Not too long.
Three weeks?
>> REID: Three weeks before I
could get in?
>> I guess.
>> REID: That's about the same
waiting time as the U.S.
It's faster than Britain, but
not as quick as Japan would be.
To finance health care, Germans
pay premiums based on income to
one of 240 private insurers.
They call them "sickness funds."
A worker earning $60,000 would
split a $750 monthly family
premium with her employer.
It's more expensive than Japan
and the UK, but still a bargain
by U.S. standards, about two-
thirds of ours.
>> It is a system where the rich
pay for the poor, and where the
ill are covered by the healthy.
>> REID: This is Professor Karl
Lauterbach, a member of the
German parliament and one of
Germany's foremost experts on
health policy.
>> So it is a nice social
support system which is highly
accepted by the population.
>> REID: Katie Haaser is one of
those patients.
She's having her third baby.
>> I'm very satisfied with the
system, especially during my
pregnancy.
I think it's maybe not perfect,
but it's the best I can imagine.
>> REID: What does she pay?
>> Actually, nothing.
I don't have to pay anything.
>> REID: While pregnant women
pay nothing, there is a
co-payment for most patients.
But you'll love this: it costs
ten Euros-- that's about 15
bucks-- and you only have to pay
that once every three months.
If you lose your job, what
happens to your health
insurance?
>> Health insurance continues
with no change if you lose a
job.
We do know very well that people
who become unemployed are at an
increased risk of becoming ill,
and therefore becoming
unemployed is about the worst
time to lose health insurance.
So therefore everyone who loses
a job remains in exactly the
health insurance system he is
in.
>> REID: German insurance plans
actively compete among
themselves for customers even
though they are not allowed to
make a profit.
So what's in it for them?
>> Sickness funds do not want to
perish.
They want to survive and grow.
And the management is better
paid if the sickness fund is
growing.
So I think the German healthcare
system is a nice third way
between a for-profit system on
the one hand and, let's say,
single payer system on the other
hand.
>> REID: It all sounds good to
me, but how does the German
system compare with ours?
To get a U.S. view, I went to
McGury's Café in the former East
Berlin to meet Mike McGury, an
American whose been living in
Germany for six years.
Good to see you.
Haven't seen you since Kladow.
>> It's been a while.
Wow, I love the new bar.
It looks great.
( speaking German )
That's all the German I know.
"I want a big beer."
>> That's all you need.
( laughter )
>> REID: You ever have to go to
the doctor?
I mean, you've used the health
care system?
>> Oh, absolutely.
>> REID: Yeah.
And what do you think?
How would you rate it?
>> Top notch.
>> REID: Oh, really?
How come?
What's good?
>> You have many different
choices, and the cost is a
fraction of what is covered in
the States.
Most of your prescriptions are
covered with very, very small
co-pays.
>> REID: And how's the quality?
I mean, do you think you're
getting good health care here?
>> Excellent.
Actually, I see no difference,
as far as quality goes, between
here and when I was in the
States.
>> REID: Really?
Surveys show Germans are
satisfied with their health
care.
The system is also efficient.
Medical providers and sickness
funds negotiate standard prices,
and this cuts administrative
costs.
They're only around 6%.
That's a quarter of what they
are in the U.S.
And drugs are a bargain here,
too.
>> The same drugs are way
cheaper in Germany than in
America.
Because, obviously, if all
sickness funds negotiate with
the drug companies for a single
price, then the market power of
the sickness funds is fully
used.
>> REID: Every year the sickness
funds also negotiate standard
prices with medical providers.
And just as in Japan, some of
these doctors feel undervalued
and underpaid.
Professor Detlev Ganten is
chairman of Berlin's giant
Charité Hospital.
So do you think your hospital is
paid enough for the services it
provides people?
>> No.
As I mentioned, it's not being
paid enough because we are
providing very expensive care to
university hospital, so we have
to economize enormously within
the university system also.
>> REID: An American hospital
that felt it wasn't getting
enough money for its services
would raise its prices.
Could you do that?
>> No, we cannot do that.
These prices are negotiated
every year, and this is done by
states.
So, within Berlin, all the
hospitals get the same kind of
DRG re-compensation.
We cannot raise our prices.
>> REID: By U.S. standards,
doctors who work in hospitals
here are not paid very well.
A 35-year-old might earn about
$80,000 a year, about half what
he'd earn in the U.S.
>> It's not a high salary.
And people correctly complain
because they work not eight
hours; they work 12 hours, 14
hours, 16 hours, and sometimes
seven days a week.
And I think they deserve more.
>> REID: Dr. Christina von
Koekritz also feels shortchanged
by the system.
A family doctor makes around
$120,000 a year, about two-
thirds of what she'd earn in the
U.S.
But then she has a lot lower
overhead.
Her malpractice premium is just
$1,400 a year, about a tenth of
what she would pay in the U.S.
And medical school didn't cost
her a penny.
In America, we have an image of
a doctor as a pretty rich
person.
>> Yes.
>> REID: Drives a Lexus to the
country club and takes vacations
in Majorca, and stuff like that.
>> It's been like this in
Germany until, I think, '80s,
the '80s, the last century,
perhaps '90s.
But it's changed in the mid of
90 years, yes.
>> REID: Okay.
>> So you... a doctor normally
has a small car today.
But he still goes to Majorca.
>> REID: Still goes to Majorca,
yeah.
Skis in St Moritz?
>> No.
( laughter )
>> REID: But a lot of doctors
aren't laughing.
In March of 2006, they felt
sufficiently angry to stop work
and take to the streets in the
heart of Berlin.
Dr. Christina was one of them.
She marched three times that
Spring.
>> I think about 18,000 or
20,000 doctors, and doctors
don't usually demonstrate.
But nothing changed.
>> REID: For Americans there's
nothing particularly foreign
about German health care.
You get health insurance through
your employer and the company
makes you pay for it.
And the coverage is great.
They got mental, they got
surgical, they got dental.
If your doctor says you're
tired, the health insurance pays
to send you to a spa.
And the Germans have made this
work.
They provide universal coverage
for a lot less money than we do.
They did it by taking the profit
out of health insurance, and
they also pay doctors a lot less
than we do.
I think there's a lot here that
we could learn from.
In just three countries, I've
picked up lots of ideas.
The Brits pay no doctor bills
and have great preventive care.
In Japan, there's no waiting
time and doctors still make
house calls.
In Germany, insurance companies
compete for business even though
they can't make a profit.
What if you could pick and
choose the best ideas from
around the world?
Well, that's exactly what one
small Asian nation did.
Great
>> Thank you.
>> REID: Taiwan's an island
nation of about 23 million that
became rapidly industrialized
and went from poor to rich in
about 20 years.
And when Taiwan got rich, the
government said, "Wait a minute,
we need a rich country's health
care system."
So you know what they did?
They set up a committee and they
looked all over the world at
different health care systems
looking for good ideas, and then
designed their own.
In the late 1980s, Taiwanese
health care was even worse than
America's is today.
About half the population had no
coverage at all.
Hongjen Chang was one of the
officials charged with designing
a new health care system from
scratch.
>> Taiwan is a small island.
We always look abroad
internationally for ideas.
Chinese saying: we say, "The
track of the previous cart is
the teacher of the following
cart."
>> REID: So if the other guy's
oxcart has found a good route to
universal health coverage,
follow those tracks.
>> Follow those tracks.
If they were trapped in trouble,
avoid that track.
Find a new track.
>> NARRATOR: So they consulted
experts from around the world
and asked William Hsiao, a
Chinese-born Harvard health
economist, to head a blue ribbon
panel.
>> Why do you want to repeat the
mistakes other people make?
You want to pick up what people
have done well and then move
beyond that.
>> REID: Another expert they
consulted was Taiwanese American
health economist Tsung-mei
Cheng.
How many different countries did
they look at, do you know?
>> Over ten.
Maybe ten, 13, 15 countries they
looked at.
And so, in the end, the program
that they finally set up in 1995
really is like a car that was
made of different parts,
imported from overseas but
manufactured domestically.
>> We examine quite extensive
the major systems of quite a
dozen-- Europe, British or
France, Germany and the Nordic
countries, Swiss or the Dutch
or America.
>> REID: Did you look at the
richest country in the world,
the United States?
>> Yes, yes, yes.
It was the best system in the
world, we thought.
>> REID: Yeah, you thought.
And when you studied it, what
did you find?
>> Well, American is not really
a system that you can copy.
It's a market.
So if you let things happen it
will be like the United States.
There are many supporters.
But in the end we said, "No,
this is not the way we want to
go."
>> REID: They wanted a system
that gave everybody equal access
to health care, free choice of
doctors with no waiting time,
and a system that encouraged
lots of competition among
medical providers.
To finance the scheme, they
chose a national insurance
system that forced everybody to
join in and pay.
But Professor Hsiao thought
Taiwan could improve on other
countries like Japan and Germany
>> We try to correct their
mistakes.
Japan has many funds.
>> REID: Yes.
>> And we unified it.
Germany let the rich people opt
out.
We do not let the rich people
opt out.
So we're building on what they
have done correctly, but trying
to overcome their deficiencies.
>> REID: The solution: to have
one government insurer
collecting the money and no
chance to opt out.
The result: a system that works
a bit like the U.S. Medicare
system for the elderly, and, in
fact, a lot like Canada's.
>> It has drug benefits, vision
care, traditional Chinese
medicine, kidney dialysis,
inpatient care, outpatient care;
just about everything under the
sun.
>> REID: And to satisfy the
patients in Taiwan, there's no
gatekeeper and no waiting times.
Clinics are open on weekends.
This street clinic was bustling
at 5:30 on a Saturday afternoon.
If I woke up in Taiwan some
morning and my shoulder is
really hurting, how long would
it take me to see an orthopedic
specialist?
>> We go now.
( laughter )
>> REID: This morning I could
see one?
>> Yeah.
>> REID: I don't have to go to a
GP and get a recommendation?
>> No, our people don't like the
idea of gatekeepers.
They want to keep themselves...
they want to decide by
themselves.
>> REID: High-tech Taiwan
designed its new health system
using state of the art
information technology.
Everybody here has to have a
smart card like this to go to
the doctor.
The doc puts it in a reader and
the patient's history,
medications, et cetera, all show
up on the screen.
And then the bill goes directly
to the government insurance
office and is paid
automatically.
So Taiwan has the lowest
administrative costs in world,
less than 2%.
Compare that to the endless
paperwork and all the denied
claims we get with for-profit
U.S. health insurance.
The smart card can also be used
in other ways.
>> If a patient goes to see a
doctor or hospital over 20 times
a month, or 50 times in a three-
month period, then the IT picks
that person out and the person
then gets a visit from the
government, the Bureau of
National Health Insurance, and
they have a little "chat."
And this works very well.
>> REID: That may be too much
like Big Brother to get by in
the U.S., but surveys show the
Taiwanese are highly satisfied
with their health care.
>> REID: How many people in
Taiwan every year go bankrupt
because of medical bills?
>> None.
>> REID: So the patients are
safe from bankruptcy.
But just like Japan, the system
itself is under strain.
>> REID: How much of the
Taiwan's GDP are you spending on
health care?
>> We spend some 6.23%.
>> REID: And do you know the
number in America?
>> Yes, it's about 15%.
>> REID: 16%, yes, that's right.
So we spend too much on health
care and don't even cover
everybody.
But the Taiwanese spend too
little, less even than Japan.
They just don't bring in enough
money to pay for all the
services they offer.
>> So actually, as we speak, the
government is borrowing from
banks to pay what there isn't
enough to pay the providers.
>> REID: Taiwan's politicians
are reluctant to increase
premiums.
They think voters will punish
them.
So that's their problem.
They know that the solution is
fairly straightforward: increase
the spending a little to maybe
8% of GDP.
Now, there's a problem the U.S.
would love to have.
Like the other countries we've
seen, Taiwan is struggling to
balance the hopes of patients
and the expectations of doctors
against the price people are
willing to pay for health care.
Before leaving Taiwan I tried
some acupuncture for my bum
shoulder.
I hurt it years ago in the navy.
Of course, Chinese medicine is
covered by Taiwan's plan, too.
Taiwan's achievement got me
thinking about what it takes to
carry out health care reform.
But to create a universal health
system in an emerging Asian
nation is one thing.
To get there in a mature free
market economy is something
else.
So my final stop was in a
country more like us that did
take on health care reform.
Some people say it's politically
impossible to fix a health care
system.
And, in fact, the last time we
tried it in 1994, the result was
disastrous failure.
But that same year here in
Switzerland, a country famous
for huge insurance companies and
drug companies, they did take on
health care reform and changed
the system.
Today they have universal
coverage with high quality.
We've come to Switzerland to see
why they made the change and how
it's working.
Like Americans, the Swiss tend
to think they're exceptional.
They don't follow the crowd.
It's a nation of eight million
people right at the center of
Europe, but it won't join the
European Union.
It denied women the vote until--
are you ready?-- 1971, and it
has higher gun ownership than
the U.S.A.
In 1994, Switzerland's health
care system resembled America's.
Medical insurance was voluntary,
generally linked to employment.
If you lost your job, you could
lose your coverage, and many
did.
Ruth Dreifuss back then was
health minister of the left-
leaning Social Democratic party,
and later the first female
president of the Swiss
Federation.
She spearheaded a new law called
LAMal, or the sickness.
It mandated that everybody buy
insurance with the state paying
for the poor.
In return, it guaranteed a
comprehensive package of medical
care for all.
Amid opposition from drug
companies and insurers the Swiss
voted in a referendum.
>> The difference between "yes"
and the "no" was a very tiny
one, a very slight one.
And the result was quite 50/50,
just with a little bit more on
the "yes" side so that the law
was passed.
>> REID: After that, insurance
companies could not cherry pick
the young and healthy to avoid
the old and the sick.
And they were not allowed to
make a profit on basic care,
although they could profit from
supplemental policies.
People who refused to get
coverage were automatically
assigned to an insurance
company and had to pay the
monthly bills.
More than ten years later, LAMal
is well accepted.
Pascal Couchepin, from the
center-right Free Democratic
party, is the current president
of Switzerland.
Originally unenthusiastic about
LAMal, today he's a supporter.
>> Everybody has a right to
health care.
>> REID: Yeah, now see, that's
striking for an American.
Because we would certainly say
everyone's entitled to an
education.
>> Yes.
>> Everyone is entitled to
legal protection if you get in
trouble with the law.
But we don't say that everyone's
entitled to health care.
>> Why?
Because it is a profound need
for people to be sure that if
they are struck by destiny, by a
stroke of destiny, they can have
a good health system?
>> REID: Dreifuss, from the
opposite political camp, agrees.
>> I think it's a basic human
right.
This is really the aim.
And this is really the reason
why I think that everybody now,
a large, large majority, would
renew the confidence in this
system because they see what it
means to have a universal
coverage.
>> REID: But I wondered about
LAMal's impact on drug and
insurance companies.
Pierre Marcel Revaz is CEO of
Groupe Mutuel, one of
Switzerland's biggest insurance
companies.
What's different here is that
many Swiss insurers were already
non-profit, so the
transformation was easier than
it might be for us.
Ten years on the insurers are
doing fine.
As in Germany, a lack of profit
has not meant a lack of
competition.
>> REID: The benefit package
here is fixed-- it's the same
for everybody-- so companies
compete in other ways.
Is this one of the ways you
compete with other companies?
You say, "We'll pay faster"?
Groupe Mutuel has a strong
incentive to keep administrative
costs low.
>> REID: Do you know what that
figure is in American health
insurance companies?
The average administrative cost
is about 22%, and you're running
at 5%.
But where the Swiss insurance
companies can make a profit is
on supplemental coverage for,
say, better hospital rooms.
This is also how they attract
more customers.
But what about the drug
companies?
In America, the drug companies
say, "Well, if you cut the price
we get for the drugs then we
won't have as much money for
research and innovation."
Is that a legitimate argument?
>> It was the same argument here
in Switzerland.
>> REID: I'm sure.
>> But I can say also that the
Swiss pharmaceutical industry
ten years after this struggle is
not bad.
In the international competition
I think the Swiss are still
belonging to the top ten.
And when you hear them, they are
not crying about the bad shape
of their industry.
>> REID: That may be because
Swiss drug companies still make
more than a third of their
profits from the less-regulated
U.S. market.
One of the problems we have in
America is that many people,
it's a huge number of people, go
bankrupt because of medical
bills.
Some studies say 700,000 people
a year.
How many people in Switzerland
go bankrupt because of medical
bills?
>> Nobody.
Doesn't happen.
It would be a huge scandal if it
happens.
>> REID: But here's
Switzerland's challenge.
Having achieved universal health
care, it has to decide how much
citizens are willing to pay.
Today an average monthly premium
for a Swiss family is about
$750.
But there's pressure to raise
the premiums.
And it's already the second most
expensive health care system in
the world, although still much
cheaper than ours.
What's interesting about
Switzerland is that after
LAMAal's success, people in this
proud capitalist country see
limits now to the free market.
Could a 100% free market system
work in health care?
>> No, I don't think so.
If you do that, you will lose
solidarity and equal access for
everybody.
>> REID: Which is what you were
finding in the late '80s.
>> Yes.
We think that is a basic value
of living in our society.
>> My plan combines employers
and individual responsibility
while maintaining Medicare and
Medicaid.
I think this whole idea...
>> REID: Back in the U.S., in an
election year, everybody's
talking about health care.
>> My belief is that if we make
it affordable, if we provide
subsidies to those who can't
afford it, they will buy it.
>> REID: Although, if you listen
carefully, none of the
candidates talks about the
lessons we could learn from
other rich democracies, like the
ones I visited.
>> The solution, my friends,
isn't a one size fits all, big
government takeover of health
care.
>> REID: What I've found is that
it's not all socialized medicine
out there.
Many countries provide universal
coverage with private insurance,
private doctors, private
hospitals, using market ideas
that might work for us.
But here's the thing.
These capitalist countries don't
trust health care entirely to
the free market.
They all impose limits.
There are three big ones.
First, insurance companies must
accept everyone and can't make a
profit on basic care.
Second, everybody's mandated to
buy insurance and the government
pays the premium for the poor.
Third, doctors and hospitals
have to accept one standard set
of fixed prices.
Can Americans accept ideas like
that?
>> Just came in to get your
temperature and your blood
pressure.
>> REID: Well, the fact is these
foreign health care ideas aren't
really so foreign to us.
For American veterans, health
care is just like Britain's NHS.
For seniors on Medicare, we're
Taiwan.
For working Americans with
insurance, we're Germany.
And for the tens of million
without health insurance, we're
just another poor country.
( sirens blaring )
But almost all of us can agree
that this fragmented health care
mess cannot be ignored.
The longer we leave it, the
sicker it becomes and the more
expensive the cure.
>> This report continues on our
web site, where you can watch
the full program again
online...
>> Get this, they spend half as
much...
>> ...find out more about
correspondent T.R. Reid and his
reporting of this story...
>> Everybody has the right to
health care.
>> ...read our interviews with
some of the world's leading
health care experts...
>> A for-profit system on the
one hand...
>> ...and learn more about the
U.S. health care system
compares to those in other
countries.
And then join the discussion at
pbs.org.
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.orgA?yÑ=
And additional funding from the
Park Foundation.
With additional funding for
this program from: